DOCS: Add Backend Developer Guide (#515)
ai-dynamo/nixl: docs/BackendGuide.md

This is achieved through the South Bound API (SB API) that serves as the standardized interface between NIXL's Transfer Agent and various backend plugins. NIXL agent handles bookkeeping for the local registered memories with backend plugins, as well as managing the required metadata for one-sided transfers, i.e., Read and Write operations, for local or remote transfers. The following diagram further illustrates these components:

> ![Figure of NIXL high level architecture](figures/nixl_high_level.png)

Reviewer: Can the diagrams be in some format easier to edit? PNGs are not trivial to edit and git diff wouldn't provide any useful info on their history. Can't this be done with simple ASCII-diagram or, even you want it to look prettier, [Mermaid](https://github.blog/developer-skills/github/include-diagrams-markdown-files-mermaid/)?

Author: the diagrams are just taken from powerpoints we've been using for customers. At the moment, remaking them all in ASCII or mermaid doesn't seem worth the time. If we get to a point where we need to be updating these diagram regularly, maybe we can reconsider.

Note that some of the methods in the SB API are not necessary to be implemented, for instance if a backend does not support notifications, it can indicate it through supportsNotif() method, and if it returns false, the agent will not send requests with notifications to this backend. There are 4 such capability indicators, which are detailed further and which APIs are required to be implemented for each of them.

![NIXL SB API](figures/nixl_sb_api.png)

## The South Bound API

For a backend to be compatible with NIXL, it must implement several key SB API methods including:

### Constructor and Destructor:

> * Constructor: A key/value set of parameters alongside Agent name is passed to the backend.

Author: I'm going to leave some inline suggestions for others to check in a separate review, I'll try to expand on this.

getPublicData and loadRemoteMD are required if backend supportsRemote, and loadLocalMD is required if backend supportsLocal, and unloadMD is required in all cases to release the deserialized remote identifier object.

### Transfer Operations:

* prepXfer(): Given a descriptor list on each side, read or write operation, and remote agent name (can be loopback to itself if supported), any preparation for a transfer can be performed here, generating a pointer nixlBackendReqH that is a base class to be inherited by the backend for storing state of transfer request.
* estimateXferCost: Given the same info as prepXfer, as well as the transfer request output from prepXfer, the backend can estimate the time of transfer, with noise margin and method of estimation. This is optional.
* postXfer(): Posts a transfer request, meaning the backend should start the transfer. This call is asynchronous, meaning it should not wait to finish the transfer. If the transfer is really small, it’s fine to return DONE right after this call.

> * checkXfer(): Checks the status of a transfer request.

Author: Same as above, I'll mention in the destructor that handle can be deallocated but I'm also not looking to add a lot of extra text at the moment as the document has already been reviewed/approved for customer use

Note that some of the methods in the SB API are not necessary to be implemented, for instance if a backend does not support notifications, it can indicate it through supportsNotif() method, and if it returns false, the agent will not send requests with notifications to this backend. There are 4 such capability indicators, which are detailed further and which APIs are required to be implemented for each of them.

![NIXL SB API](figures/nixl_sb_api.png)

## The South Bound API

For a backend to be compatible with NIXL, it must implement several key SB API methods including:

### Constructor and Destructor:

* Constructor: A key/value set of parameters alongside Agent name is passed to the backend.

> * Destructor: Release the remaining resources.

Reviewer 2: string to byte array

### Capability Indicators:

* supportsLocal(): Indicates if the backend supports transfers within a node
* supportsRemote(): Indicates if the backend supports transfers across nodes

> * supportsNotif(): Indicates if the backend supports notifications

Reviewer 2: I think it is the definition of that flag. So the next line add that point.

> * supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, potentially in a separate thread

Reviewer 2: supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, in case of central progress thread.

> * supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, potentially in a separate thread

Author: ```suggestion
* supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, in case of central progress thread.
```

* getSupportedMems(): Indicates memory types supported by the backend

> Based on the first 4 methods (supports*), the required methods to be implemented change. For instance, UCX backend implements all as it supports all scenarios, while GDS backend only has supportsLocal, detailed more in Example implementations. Note that a network backend should have supportsRemote and supportsNotif to be set to true, and preferably supportsLocal also to true, so another backend doesn’t need to be involved for local transfers. For a storage backend, it should have supportsLocal and supportsNotif is optional. supportsProgressThread is optional for both cases.

Author: ```suggestion
Based on the first 4 methods (supports*), the required methods to be implemented change. For instance, UCX backend implements all as it supports all scenarios, while GDS backend only has supportsLocal, detailed more in Example implementations. Note that a network backend should have supportsRemote and supportsNotif to be set to true, and preferably supportsLocal also to true, so another backend doesn’t need to be involved for local transfers. For a storage backend, it should have supportsLocal and supportsNotif is optional. supportsProgressThread is optional for both cases. Additionally, a backend that supportsRemote must also support supportNotifs.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Note that supportProgressThread is an indicator whether a backend can support progress thread, but does not indicate a need or lack of need for a progress thread. During init params set to a backend, enablement of progress thread is set, and if a backend cannot work without progress thread while the parameter is set to use, or vice versa, the backend creation would fail. This flag is useful for the NIXL agent in case of running in Multi-threaded mode to know which backends to check if such init parameter was passed to them. Also in future there might be a mode with a central progress method that calls progress of backends that set this flag. However, the timeline for that feature is not clear since there is a potential for contention across different backend progress threads and its benefits need to be studied.
```

getPublicData and loadRemoteMD are required if backend supportsRemote, and loadLocalMD is required if backend supportsLocal, and unloadMD is required in all cases to release the deserialized remote identifier object.

### Transfer Operations:

* prepXfer(): Given a descriptor list on each side, read or write operation, and remote agent name (can be loopback to itself if supported), any preparation for a transfer can be performed here, generating a pointer nixlBackendReqH that is a base class to be inherited by the backend for storing state of transfer request.
* estimateXferCost: Given the same info as prepXfer, as well as the transfer request output from prepXfer, the backend can estimate the time of transfer, with noise margin and method of estimation. This is optional.
* postXfer(): Posts a transfer request, meaning the backend should start the transfer. This call is asynchronous, meaning it should not wait to finish the transfer. If the transfer is really small, it’s fine to return DONE right after this call.
* checkXfer(): Checks the status of a transfer request.

> * releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle.

Author: ```suggestion
* releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle. Note that if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above, that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases and **not** just in `releaseReqH()`. Because of this, the destructor for the request handle should handle proper cancelling and teardown of requests. 
```

Note that after this step, if there was at least one backend in common between the two agents, there can be transfers between the two agents.

### Invalidate remote agent metadata

Agent will determine which backends were common during the time of loading remote metadata of that specific agent, and call **disconnect** in SB API to that agent for such backends. Also, for each of the remote identifiers stored for that remote agent for the corresponding common backends, it will call the **unloadMD** in SB API to release the resources.

Note that after this step, the local agent cannot initiate transfers to the remote agent anymore, until its metadata is reloaded again. Through these two methods the dynamicity requirement of NIXL agents are achieved.

Regarding marginal updates, they only require some extra bookkeeping within the agent, and central KV service mode is just the interface between the agent and central metadata server, and does not change how the SB APIs are used.

### Create transfer request:

> This API does the preparations on the agent side and does not call the backend SB API. However, it decides which backend to choose (unless optionally specified by the user). If a backend is not specified, the agent will look at the memory types of the request on both sides, the available backend engines on both sides, as well as the memory ranges registered with each backend for that specific memory type. Usually considering all these factors only a single backend can deliver the transfer request, otherwise we select the first match, or use a preference list.

Author: ```suggestion
This API does the preparations on both the agent side and backend request through the SB API **prepXfer**. This function must be implemented, but can be left empty in some cases if it doesn't make sense to prepare request handles or state ahead of time for a specific backend.  

At this stage, the NIXL Agent also decides which backend to choose (unless optionally specified by the user). If a backend is not specified, the agent will look at the memory types of the request on both sides, the available backend engines on both sides, as well as the memory ranges registered with each backend for that specific memory type. Usually considering all these factors only a single backend can deliver the transfer request, otherwise we select the first match, or use a preference list.
```

![NIXL SB API](figures/nixl_sb_api.png)

## The South Bound API

For a backend to be compatible with NIXL, it must implement several key SB API methods including:

### Constructor and Destructor:

* Constructor: A key/value set of parameters alongside Agent name is passed to the backend.
* Destructor: Release the remaining resources.

The key/value parameters are a map of strings to byte arrays that are passed from the Agent. These can be whatever the backend needs as its initialization parameters. See the `get_backend_options` plugin API for more detail on how to specify these.

### Capability Indicators:

* supportsLocal(): Indicates if the backend supports transfers within a node
* supportsRemote(): Indicates if the backend supports transfers across nodes
* supportsNotif(): Indicates if the backend supports notifications

> * supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, in case of central progress thread.

Reviewer 2: Indicates if the backend supports progress() method. That method should call the underlying procedure of progressing transfers for this backend.

(UCX doesn't require calls but set this to true, in our slides we mention progress should be implemented if this flag is set, so let it be just that and we provide further details in 2 paragraphs.)

> * supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend requires calls to a progress method, in case of central progress thread.

Author: ```suggestion
* supportsProgressThread(): Indicates if the backend supports progress() method. That method should call the underlying procedure of progressing transfers for this backend.
```

* getSupportedMems(): Indicates memory types supported by the backend

Based on the first 4 methods (supports*), the required methods to be implemented change. For instance, UCX backend implements all as it supports all scenarios, while GDS backend only has supportsLocal, detailed more in Example implementations. Note that a network backend should have supportsRemote and supportsNotif to be set to true, and preferably supportsLocal also to true, so another backend doesn’t need to be involved for local transfers. For a storage backend, it should have supportsLocal and supportsNotif is optional. supportsProgressThread is optional for both cases. Additionally, a backend that supportsRemote must also support supportNotifs.

> Note that supportProgressThread is an indicator whether a backend can support progress thread, but does not indicate a need or lack of need for a progress thread. During init params set to a backend, enablement of progress thread is set, and if a backend cannot work without progress thread while the parameter is set to use, or vice versa, the backend creation would fail. This flag is useful for the NIXL agent in case of running in Multi-threaded mode to know which backends to check if such init parameter was passed to them. Also in future there might be a mode with a central progress method that calls progress of backends that set this flag. However, the timeline for that feature is not clear since there is a potential for contention across different backend progress threads and its benefits need to be studied.

Reviewer 2: Note that supportProgressThread is an indicator whether a backend has implemented the progress() method, but does not imply how the progress thread is implemented. During creation of a backend, the provided init params indicate how the progress thread is intended to be used. For instance, if the enablement of progress thread is set to false, while a backend cannot work without a separate progress thread, the backend creation would fail. This flag is useful for the NIXL agent if we want to provide some agent level guarantees, such as minimum time between calls to progress for backends, or if a central progress method is implemented (for future proofing, not currently implemented).

> Note that supportProgressThread is an indicator whether a backend can support progress thread, but does not indicate a need or lack of need for a progress thread. During init params set to a backend, enablement of progress thread is set, and if a backend cannot work without progress thread while the parameter is set to use, or vice versa, the backend creation would fail. This flag is useful for the NIXL agent in case of running in Multi-threaded mode to know which backends to check if such init parameter was passed to them. Also in future there might be a mode with a central progress method that calls progress of backends that set this flag. However, the timeline for that feature is not clear since there is a potential for contention across different backend progress threads and its benefits need to be studied.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that supportProgressThread is an indicator whether a backend has implemented the progress() method, but does not imply how the progress thread is implemented. During creation of a backend, the provided init params indicate how the progress thread is intended to be used. For instance, if the enablement of progress thread is set to false, while a backend cannot work without a separate progress thread, the backend creation would fail. This flag is useful for the NIXL agent if we want to provide some agent level guarantees, such as minimum time between calls to progress for backends, or if a central progress method is implemented (for future proofing, not currently implemented).
```

getPublicData and loadRemoteMD are required if backend supportsRemote, and loadLocalMD is required if backend supportsLocal, and unloadMD is required in all cases to release the deserialized remote identifier object.

### Transfer Operations:

* prepXfer(): Given a descriptor list on each side, read or write operation, and remote agent name (can be loopback to itself if supported), any preparation for a transfer can be performed here, generating a pointer nixlBackendReqH that is a base class to be inherited by the backend for storing state of transfer request.
* estimateXferCost: Given the same info as prepXfer, as well as the transfer request output from prepXfer, the backend can estimate the time of transfer, with noise margin and method of estimation. This is optional.
* postXfer(): Posts a transfer request, meaning the backend should start the transfer. This call is asynchronous, meaning it should not wait to finish the transfer. If the transfer is really small, it’s fine to return DONE right after this call.
* checkXfer(): Checks the status of a transfer request.

> * releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle. Note that if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above, that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases. Because of this, this function should handle proper cancelling and teardown of requests.

Author: ```suggestion
* releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle, which should be an extension of the nixlBackendReqH. Note that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases, expecting this function to handle proper cancellation of requests in addition to freeing resources.
```

> * releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle. Note that if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above, that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases. Because of this, this function should handle proper cancelling and teardown of requests. 

Author: ```suggestion
* releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle. Note that if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above, that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases. Because of this, this function should handle proper cancelling and teardown of requests.
```

* estimateXferCost: Given the same info as prepXfer, as well as the transfer request output from prepXfer, the backend can estimate the time of transfer, with noise margin and method of estimation. This is optional.
* postXfer(): Posts a transfer request, meaning the backend should start the transfer. This call is asynchronous, meaning it should not wait to finish the transfer. If the transfer is really small, it’s fine to return DONE right after this call.
* checkXfer(): Checks the status of a transfer request.

> * releaseReqH(): Releases a transfer request handle. Note that if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above, that the NIXL agent may release that handle at a number of error cases. Because of this, this function should handle proper cancelling and teardown of requests. 

Reviewer 2: I'm a tad confused, "if you have extended the nixlBackendReqH to track request state as described above", that sounds like a must thing to do, so maybe redundant? And is the issue just in case of abort, due to some error or user request? Or there is another scenario that this method might be called?
